======================
About OmegaGTE & OmegaSL
======================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :depth: 2

----

The Problem with Modern Graphics
---------------------------------

Graphics programming today sits at an awkward intersection: the hardware has
never been more powerful, and the APIs have never been harder to use.

The modern low-level graphics APIs — **Direct3D 12**, **Metal**, and **Vulkan**
— were all designed around the same core idea: give the developer explicit
control over every GPU operation that was previously hidden inside the driver.
This was a necessary and correct evolution. The implicit driver models of
OpenGL and Direct3D 11 caused subtle, hard-to-reproduce performance problems,
unpredictable pipeline stalls, and inconsistent behaviour across GPU vendors.
Giving developers direct control over memory management, pipeline state
compilation, synchronisation barriers, and resource lifetime was the right
long-term direction.

The cost is verbosity. A minimal Vulkan application that opens a window and
draws a single coloured triangle — no textures, no depth, no mesh loading —
requires roughly **800–1000 lines of boilerplate** before a single pixel
appears. That boilerplate includes swap chain creation, render pass
definitions, framebuffer objects, descriptor set layouts, descriptor pools,
pipeline layout objects, graphics pipeline state objects, command pool and
command buffer allocation, synchronisation primitives (semaphores and fences),
and explicit image layout transitions. None of that is your application logic.
All of it is infrastructure that must be present, correctly ordered, and kept
in sync as the program evolves.

Direct3D 12 and Metal are less extreme but follow the same pattern. Each API
also has its own shader language (HLSL for DirectX, MSL for Metal, GLSL for
Vulkan), its own resource binding model, its own synchronisation vocabulary,
and its own behaviour on the specific driver it targets. A renderer written
for one platform does not transfer cleanly to another.

The result is that a significant fraction of every cross-platform graphics
project is infrastructure code that provides no user-visible value: layers of
abstraction, adapter classes, shader permutation management, and
platform-specific initialisation paths. This is the problem OmegaGTE
addresses.

----

What OmegaGTE Does Differently
--------------------------------

OmegaGTE provides a **single, consistent C++ API** that maps to Direct3D 12
on Windows, Metal on macOS and iOS, and Vulkan on Linux and Android. It is
not an emulation layer or a compatibility shim. It compiles directly to each
platform's native API and adds no extra overhead at draw time. What it
removes is the per-platform setup ceremony.

The design principles are:

**Descriptors are the contract.**
Every resource and pipeline state is created from a plain descriptor struct.
You fill in the fields that matter, leave everything else at its default, and
get back a handle. There are no multi-step builder patterns, no opaque
pipeline cache objects to manage, and no mandatory callbacks to implement.

**Resources own their lifetimes.**
All GPU objects are returned as ``SharedHandle<>`` (a ``std::shared_ptr``
alias). You cannot accidentally free a buffer that is still in flight because
the handle stays alive as long as any reference to it exists. The common
pattern of dangling-pointer crashes during swap chain resize or frame teardown
disappears.

**The command buffer is the API surface.**
Render passes, compute dispatches, and blit operations are all encoded into
the same command buffer type. You open a pass, record commands, close the
pass, submit, and commit. There is no distinction between "primary" and
"secondary" command buffers, no render pass object that outlives the frame,
and no manual resource barrier management for the common cases.

**Synchronisation is fences.**
Cross-queue synchronisation reduces to ``submitCommandBuffer(buf, signalFence)``
on the producer side and ``notifyCommandBuffer(buf, waitFence)`` on the
consumer side. CPU-side blocking is ``commitToGPUAndWait()``. The underlying
semaphores, timeline values, and barrier transitions are generated by the
backend.

**Queues are first-class and typed.**
Every command queue is built from a ``GECommandQueueDesc`` that names
what the queue is for — universal, graphics-only, async compute, or
DMA / transfer — plus an execution priority (Low, Normal, High,
Realtime) and an optional debug label. On Vulkan that maps to a real
queue-family pick with the documented fallback ladder and to a per-queue
priority via ``pQueuePriorities[]`` + ``VK_KHR_global_priority``; on
D3D12 to a typed ``D3D12_COMMAND_QUEUE_DESC`` (DIRECT / COMPUTE / COPY,
NORMAL / HIGH / GLOBAL_REALTIME); on Metal to a debug label and a
recorded type-hint. Texture uploads can run on a dedicated transfer
queue without stalling the frame; an async-compute pass can take its
own queue; the present queue can be ``Graphics + High`` so swap-chain
work isn't competing with background uploads. The buffer-pool size you
pass is the **initial hint** for a growable pool — ``getAvailableBuffer``
recycles slots via per-queue submission tracking and allocates more on
demand up to a backend-defined ceiling.

**Capabilities are queried, never assumed.**
Every device reports a ``GTEDeviceFeatures`` set — a bitmask of discrete GPU
capabilities (ray tracing, mesh shaders, variable-rate shading, 16-bit shader
types, and more) alongside its shader-model tier and hardware limits. Advanced
features are *not* separate platform-specific code paths. Ray tracing and mesh
shading are uniform OmegaGTE operations on every backend whose hardware can run
them, selected by a single ``device->features.hasFeature(...)`` check rather
than by ``#ifdef`` per platform. When a device lacks a capability, the feature
is conservatively reported as unavailable rather than silently misbehaving, and
your code branches on the capability bit to choose an alternative path. The
decision is data, not a compile-time platform fork.

The net effect is that the infrastructure a typical application needs — device
setup, render target creation, a render pipeline, a compute pipeline, a
command queue, and a frame loop — fits in roughly 80–120 lines of code. The
rest is your application.

A CPU software fallback, built on Google's SwiftShader, is on the roadmap. Its
goal is to keep applications running on machines with no usable GPU — old
hardware, headless servers, CI runners, or VMs without GPU passthrough — by
appearing as just another device from the caller's point of view, reporting a
reduced ``GTEDeviceFeatures`` set so the same capability-gating logic applies
unchanged. *(This path is planned but not yet implemented.)* On a target like
this the developer knows in advance that they are shipping to software
rasterization and can scale their graphics accordingly.

----

The Shader Language Problem
----------------------------

Unifying the C++ API solves the host side. It does not solve the shader side.

The three target shader languages differ in ways that matter:

* **HLSL** uses ``StructuredBuffer<T>`` for read-only structured buffers and
  ``RWStructuredBuffer<T>`` for read-write. Textures are sampled with
  ``texture.Sample(sampler, uv)``. Vector types are ``float2``, ``float3``,
  ``float4``.

* **MSL** passes structured buffers as ``constant T*`` (read) or
  ``device T*`` (write). Textures are sampled with ``texture.sample(sampler, uv)``.
  Vector types share the same names as HLSL but matrix types differ.
  The ``mix`` function replaces HLSL's ``lerp``; ``fract`` replaces ``frac``.

* **GLSL** (used by Vulkan via SPIR-V) binds buffers with
  ``layout(std430) buffer`` blocks. Textures are sampled with
  ``texture(sampler2D(tex, smp), uv)``. Vector types are ``vec2``, ``vec3``,
  ``vec4``; matrix types are ``mat2``, ``mat3``, ``mat4``. The language
  requires explicit ``layout(location = N)`` decorations throughout.

These are not cosmetic differences. They affect type names, function names,
resource binding syntax, the semantics of ``in``/``out`` qualifiers,
tessellation stage interfaces, and compute threadgroup syntax. Writing one
shader that works correctly across all three either requires an extensive
preprocessor-macro compatibility layer or means writing three separate files
and keeping them in sync as the shader evolves.

What is striking about these differences is that they are almost entirely
*structural*. The arithmetic a shader performs, the way it samples a texture,
the way a compute kernel is dispatched — the underlying GPU operations are the
same on every platform. What changes between HLSL, MSL, and GLSL is how those
operations are spelled and how the shader is structured: the type names, the
binding syntax, the qualifier semantics. That observation is the premise
OmegaSL is built on. If the operations are common and only the spelling
differs, a single source language can own the spelling and emit the right
structure for each target.

**OmegaSL** is a purpose-built shading language that compiles down to all
three targets from a single source file. The compiler (``omegaslc``) handles
every translation: buffer types become the right binding model per platform,
vector constructors become the right constructor syntax, built-in functions
map to their platform equivalents. A developer writes one ``.omegasl`` file
and ships one ``.omegasllib`` archive per platform build, produced
automatically by the build system.

This is a different approach from cross-compiling one existing shader language
into the others. Tools such as **SPIRV-Cross** and **ShaderConductor**
transpile at the intermediate-representation level — HLSL or SPIR-V in, GLSL or
MSL out. They are capable tools, but a transpiler inherits the semantics of its
*source* language: its output is a mechanical translation of how a shader was
expressed for one API, not code written to each target's native idioms and
feature set. The semantics of the source language leak into every target, and
features that one language expresses naturally must be emulated when they have
no direct equivalent in another. OmegaSL is instead a single front-end with
three native back-ends, so each target gets code generated directly for its own
binding model, type system, and built-in functions rather than translated
through another language's worldview.

The feature-gating model that governs the C++ API extends to shaders as well.
A shader can declare the capabilities it depends on with a ``#requires(...)``
directive — ray tracing, mesh shaders, 16-bit types, subgroup operations, and
so on. By default ``omegaslc`` compiles assuming the highest capability the
target platform can express, and records each shader's required-feature set
into the ``.omegasllib`` archive. At load time the runtime masks those
requirements against the live device's ``GTEDeviceFeatures`` and loads only the
shaders the hardware can actually run, emitting a precise diagnostic naming the
missing features for any shader it has to skip. The compiler additionally warns
when a file mixes feature-using shaders with ones that do not, and suggests
splitting the former into a ``<name>_<feature>.omegasl`` so that a device
without the feature can still load the rest of the library. The result is that
one compiled library adapts to the device it is loaded on, rather than failing
wholesale because a single shader used a capability the hardware lacks.

The language is intentionally not a large general-purpose language. It covers
the operations that GPU shaders actually perform: typed arithmetic on scalar,
vector, and matrix types; structured buffer and texture access; compute
dispatch parameters; tessellation control and evaluation. It excludes features
that do not map cleanly across all three target languages, such as
double-precision floats, which Metal does not support without extensions.
This conservatism is deliberate: a feature that cannot be reliably translated
is a cross-platform bug waiting to happen.

----

Why Not OpenGL?
---------------

OpenGL was designed in 1992 when graphics hardware was fundamentally different.
The GPU was a fixed-function pipeline with configurable stages; the API's job
was to configure those stages. As GPUs became programmable, OpenGL added
shaders, then geometry shaders, then tessellation, then compute — each time
as an extension that was later promoted to core, accumulating a history of
deprecated paths, driver-specific quirks, and API surface that exists only
for backward compatibility.

The specific problems that make OpenGL unsuitable as a modern foundation:

**Implicit global state.** An OpenGL context is a giant state machine. Every
``glBind*`` call mutates shared context state. A texture bound in one code
path affects the next draw call unless it is explicitly unbound. This model
makes multi-threaded rendering difficult, makes pipeline state hard to reason
about, and has historically caused driver bugs when state combinations are
unusual.

**Driver-managed synchronisation.** OpenGL's threading model requires the
driver to figure out when a resource is safe to modify or read. This involves
internal reference counting, implicit flushes, and pipeline stalls the
developer cannot predict or control. The result is inconsistent frame times
and CPU-side blocking in places the developer did not expect.

**No first-class ray tracing.** Ray tracing support in OpenGL exists only as
a vendor extension (``GL_NV_ray_tracing``), not as a cross-vendor standard
backed by the specification body. Vulkan's ``VK_KHR_ray_tracing_pipeline``
and DirectX Raytracing (DXR) are cross-vendor standards with hardware
acceleration across all current discrete GPUs. Metal supports ray tracing
from macOS 11 / iOS 14. OmegaGTE exposes a unified acceleration structure
and ray dispatch API on all three platforms.

**Active deprecation.** OpenGL 4.6, released in 2017, is the last planned
version. The Khronos Group has since focused all GPU API development resources
on Vulkan. Apple deprecated OpenGL in macOS 10.14 (2018) and iOS 12 (2018),
marking it for eventual removal. Building a new rendering system on a
deprecated API creates technical debt the moment the first line is written.

----

Why Not an Existing Abstraction Layer?
---------------------------------------

Several open-source projects provide cross-platform GPU abstraction:
``bgfx``, ``sokol_gfx``, ``WebGPU`` / ``wgpu``, and ``ANGLE`` all occupy
overlapping territory. The reasons they are not the right foundation for
this project are architectural.

**bgfx** has a retained-mode command submission model and its own shader
language (``shaderc``). It targets a very wide range of backends including
OpenGL and OpenGL ES, which adds overhead and restricts the API surface to
the least common denominator across all of them.

**sokol_gfx** is excellent for simple use cases but deliberately limits
its API to a small subset of GPU features. It does not expose ray tracing,
does not have a tessellation pipeline, and does not provide the fine-grained
synchronisation primitives needed for multi-queue rendering.

**WebGPU / wgpu** is designed around the constraints of running inside a
browser sandbox. Resource barriers, bind group layouts, and pipeline
compilation all reflect the browser's threat model. For a native application
that does not need to run inside a browser, these constraints add overhead
without benefit.

**ANGLE** translates OpenGL ES to Direct3D or Vulkan. It exists to enable
web browser GPU code on platforms that don't have OpenGL. Its design goal is
compatibility, not performance or modern API ergonomics.

OmegaGTE targets only the three modern, actively developed native APIs —
Direct3D 12, Metal, and Vulkan. This allows the abstraction to be designed
around what those APIs actually provide, rather than around what the lowest-
common-denominator across a wider backend set can express.

----

Why Not a Full Game Engine?
---------------------------

Unreal Engine and Unity are not abstraction layers; they are complete
products — editor, asset pipeline, scripting, physics, animation, and a
renderer, all integrated. If what you need is a finished game engine, use one.
OmegaGTE sits at a different layer: it is the graphics foundation you build
*on*, the way the Omega project's own kREATE engine is built on it. The useful
comparison is therefore not feature-for-feature, but how each handles the two
problems OmegaGTE exists to solve — cross-platform advanced features and
cross-platform shaders.

**Advanced features.** Ray tracing and mesh shaders are where cross-platform
support is hardest to assemble, and the engines show the cost. Unreal Engine
reaches ray tracing and mesh-shader-class geometry on Linux through Vulkan and,
more recently, on macOS through Metal — but only after years of sustained
per-platform engineering. Unity's ray tracing, at the time of writing, runs
only through DirectX 12 and is unavailable on Metal or Vulkan, so a Unity
project targeting macOS or Linux cannot use it at all. None of this reflects a
hardware or API limitation: all three native APIs expose these features. The
cost is the backend work of mapping one capability onto three APIs and gating
it where a device falls short. OmegaGTE makes that mapping part of its contract
rather than an afterthought — a supported feature is the same operation on every
backend that can run it, reported through ``GTEDeviceFeatures`` instead of
reintroduced as a per-platform code path.

**The shader language.** Neither engine has a neutral shading language. Unity
wraps HLSL inside **ShaderLab** — a declarative container for passes and render
state, not a cross-language in its own right — while Unreal authors HLSL
directly in ``.usf`` / ``.ush`` files, with its material graph generating more
HLSL. Both then *cross-compile that HLSL* to the other platforms: Unity
translates compiled DirectX bytecode to GLSL, MSL, and SPIR-V through its
``HLSLcc`` tool; Unreal runs HLSL through ``hlslcc`` and a DXC → SPIR-V path for
Vulkan and Metal. The consequence is the one described earlier for transpilers
in general — HLSL's semantics travel to every target, because HLSL *is* the
source of truth on every target. OmegaSL takes the opposite approach: a neutral
language with native back-ends that emit idiomatic HLSL, MSL, and GLSL from one
source, so no single platform's shading model is imposed on the others.

----

The Triangulation Engine
-------------------------

Rendering a shape requires triangles. A GPU only draws triangles. Everything
visible on screen — a rectangle, a circle, a rounded button, a 3D sphere — is
ultimately a list of ``(x, y, z)`` positions and associated data uploaded to
a vertex buffer and submitted to a draw call.

In practice, computing those triangle lists is a significant amount of
non-trivial code. Subdividing a sphere into a latitude-longitude mesh requires
careful index buffer construction. Triangulating a rounded rectangle requires
computing arc sample points at a consistent angular resolution. Extruding a
2D vector path into a stroked mesh requires computing offset curves, handling
joins and caps, and avoiding self-intersection.

This code is not application logic. It is geometry infrastructure that every
application needs but that provides no direct user value. OmegaGTE's
Triangulation Engine generates it from high-level descriptions —
``TETriangulationParams::Rect()``, ``TETriangulationParams::Ellipsoid()``,
``TETriangulationParams::GraphicsPath2D()`` — and returns a
``TETriangulationResult`` whose ``gpuVertexBuffer`` is already uploaded and
ready to bind directly to a render pass.

The engine supports three execution modes:

* **Synchronous** (``triangulateSync``) — runs on the calling thread.
  Appropriate for startup and one-time geometry setup.
* **Asynchronous** (``triangulateAsync``) — runs on a background CPU thread.
  Returns a ``std::future<>`` so the caller is not blocked.
* **GPU** (``triangulateOnGPU``) — dispatches to a compute pipeline.
  Fastest for large or frequently regenerated meshes.

This is the layer that makes OmegaGTE particularly useful for UI toolkit
implementors, where every visible element is a geometric shape that needs to
be triangulated, positioned, and drawn every frame.

----

The Role of OmegaGTE in the Omega Project
------------------------------------------

OmegaGTE is the graphics foundation of the broader Omega Graphics Project.
The modules above it depend on it directly:

**OmegaWTK** (the widget toolkit) uses OmegaGTE's render targets, render
pipelines, and triangulation engine to draw every UI element. Buttons, text,
scroll views, windows — all rendered via OmegaGTE on whichever GPU API the
platform provides, without WTK containing any platform-specific rendering
code.

**kREATE** (the game engine) uses OmegaGTE for its scene renderer, providing
a 3D rendering pipeline, compute-based physics and particle systems, and
ray-traced lighting on hardware that supports it.

Both are possible because OmegaGTE abstracts the platform difference
completely. The same WTK widget render code runs on a Windows machine with
Direct3D 12 and on a MacBook with Metal, producing identical output from
identical source.

----

Practical Impact
-----------------

The practical effect of OmegaGTE on development speed is most visible in what
you do not write:

* No platform detection in rendering code. A ``GERenderPipelineState`` is a
  ``GERenderPipelineState`` regardless of backend.
* No per-platform shader variants. One ``.omegasl`` file compiles to HLSL,
  MSL, and GLSL.
* No manual barrier tracking. Resource transitions between passes are handled
  by the backend based on pass descriptors.
* No geometry math. Rectangles, ellipsoids, rounded shapes, and vector paths
  go directly to ``TETriangulationParams`` and come back as vertex buffers.
* No lifetime bugs. ``SharedHandle<>`` keeps GPU resources alive while any
  code holds a reference.

In an era where developer time is the binding constraint — and where using
AI-assisted development means every token of boilerplate code still costs
context window space and review time — the reduction in structural overhead
directly translates into faster iteration, narrower diffs, and code that is
easier to read, review, and maintain.

The ambition of OmegaGTE is not to hide the GPU. It is to remove the parts
of GPU programming that are identical on every project and that add no value
to the application being built, so the remaining code is the part that
actually matters.
